 1 
      Lower Merion Little League 
     www.lmll.org 
 
 
2026 AAA Rules and Regulations 
This version supersedes and replaces any prior version. 
 
A. Evaluations and Drafts 
 
1. The Lower Merion Little League (“LMLL”) will announce a deadline for registration for little league play 
for the upcoming season.  This is a drop dead deadline after which no player may register.  People 
registering after this date can only be considered by the Executive Director and Commissioner on a case 
by case basis.   
 
2. LMLL will announce a place and time for a player evaluation for players that are league age eligible for 
this division. 
 
3. Every player is expected to be evaluated at the time and place as determined and announced by LMLL. 
 
4. If a player is unable to make his division’s evaluation then the Commissioner is to be notified by the 
player’s parent/guardian via email.   
 
5. Sometime between the player evaluation and the season’s start, a player draft shall be held at the time and 
place as determined by the Commissioner with the approval of the President. 
 
6. All player evaluation material shall be distributed to all Managers and Head Coaches prior to the day of 
the draft. 
 
7. Players not present at the evaluation shall be discussed prior to the draft’s start in the presence of all 
Managers and Head Coaches.  This discussion shall include that player’s ability level in different aspects 
of the game, attitude and commitment level.  At the discussion’s end, this player shall be assigned a 
composite number evaluation number which is the result of a general consensus of those with knowledge 
of the player. 
 
8. With all eligible divisional players having been assigned a composite number value (either through direct 
evaluation or through number 7 above), a draft shall take place until all eligible players are placed on a 
team. 
 
9. There are different methods to conduct a draft.  After all Managers’ and Head Coaches’ children are 
placed on the draft template, the remaining eligible players are selected.  
 
10. The player draft method decided upon by the Commissioner is subject to the Executive Director’s 
approval and should be communicated to all Managers and Head Coaches prior to the day of the draft. 
 
11. The number of players on a team shall be determined by the Commissioner with the approval of the 
Executive Director. 
 
12. The number of teams in the division shall be determined by the Commissioner with the approval of the 
Executive Director. 

 2 
 
13. If a player is added to the division (only with approval of the LMLL Board of Directors (“Board”)), then 
the Commissioner shall add that player to teams as he seems fit. 
 
14. Except for siblings, players shall not be placed on the same team for reasons like “friends” or “car 
pooling”. 
 
15. Unless there is a parental request to the contrary, siblings shall be placed on the same team in a manner 
that a team drafting the higher ranked sibling shall also take the other sibling with a draft pick in the 
round that best fits the lower sibling’s composite number score.  For example, if team X drafts Bill in the 
1st  round then his brother Bob will automatically go to team X and if Bob’s score rates him as a 6th 
rounder then team X’s 6th round pick is Bob and there is no other round 6 selection by team X. 
 
16. All evaluation materials should be destroyed after the draft and at the site of the draft with no materials 
leaving the room. 
 
B.  General Rules and Regulations 
 
1. Official “Little League” Rules 
a. All “Little League Official Regulations and Playing Rules” shall apply unless otherwise noted as 
below. 
b. Prior to draft day, these rules shall be distributed to all Managers and Head Coaches for review.  
Prior to the actual draft, ample opportunity for discussion, questions and clarification regarding 
these rules should be provided to those assembled. 
c. LMLL may suspend, change or eliminate any LMLL rule.  
 
2. Postponement/Cancellations  Prior to the games’ start, LMLL is responsible for decisions regarding 
postponement or cancellations due to inclement weather or any unforeseen events.  If time allows, this 
will be communicated via LMLL’s website.  Once play begins, the decision to stop play for any reason 
will be at the umpire’s sole discretion. 
 
3. Field Inspection. Before the game starts, the field should be inspected for any hazards or dangerous 
situations. 
 
4. Line Up Exchange.  Fifteen minutes prior to the game’s start, each team’s Manager or Head Coach shall 
exchange line-ups.  Five minutes prior to a game, each team’s Manager or coach shall meet with the 
umpire to discuss ground rules and issues deemed necessary by any party. 
 
5. Non Batting Offensive (or non fielded defensive) Players.  Players must sit on the bench when not batting 
or on deck or not assigned a field position, the only exceptions are a “player base coach”, a pitcher 
warming up, the warm-up catcher, and a player protecting the warming up pitcher and catcher. 
 
6. Protecting Players.  Any player protecting a warm-up pitcher and catcher must wear a batting helmet and 
fielder’s mitt. 
 
7. Pre Game Warm Up.  The away team shall take fielding practice at least 20 minutes prior to game’s 
scheduled and the home team will take the field 10 minutes prior to start for their fielding practice. 
Coaches may alter this if they are both in agreement. 
 
8. Required Numbered of Players.  Team unable to field at least 8 players within 10 minutes of the game’s 
scheduled start forfeit with an 1-0 loss recorded.  If a team fielding 8 players loses a player for any reason 
 3 
then that team shall forfeit the game regardless of the score at the time.  This will also result in an 1-0 
loss. 
 
9. Fielders.  Each team shall have a maximum of nine (9) players in the field, and may play with only eight 
(8) players if the team has only eight (8) players for the game. 
  
10. “Official Games”.  For a game to be official 3 ½ innings must be completed if the home team is leading 
after 3 ½ innings or 4 innings must be completed if the visiting team is leading.  If suspended prior to the 
above for any reason, then the Commissioner shall reschedule the game which will pick up from the 
stoppage point with all the same situations that were in place (with the exception of pitch count rules {see 
C.5}).  A continued game shall proceed for 6 innings unless stopped for weather, darkness or the “mercy” 
rule.  
 
11. Mercy Rule.  If a team has a 10 or more run lead after 4 innings (3 ½ for a home team) then the game is 
officially over at that point.  If a team cuts the lead to 9 or less runs then the game will continue.  In 
games officially ended by the Mercy Rule, and if both coaches agree, the teams may continue to play as a 
scrimmage from that point forward.  The home team must have an equal number of at bats as the visiting 
team.  
 
12. Six Run Rule. The limit of runs scored by a team in any half inning is 6 runs.  If a team is up by 5 runs 
and hit results in 2 runs scoring, only 6 runs are counted for that half inning. The exception to this rule is 
in the last inning.  There is no run per inning rule in the 6th, extra innings or the last inning when declared 
by the umpire. 
 
13. Extra innings.  Each game should consist of 6 innings.  If a game is tied after 6 innings and another 
LMLL team is waiting to use the field, the game ends in a tie and no extra innings may be played. If a 
game is tied after 6 innings and no other LMLL team(s) are waiting to use the field, extra innings may be 
started at the umpire's discretion.  If extra innings are started, they may continue until the field is needed 
for another LMLL game or the game is called by the umpire for weather, darkness, or other reason.  If a 
game is called in extra innings after the visiting team holds a lead but before the home team is able to bat 
to complete the inning, then the final score shall revert to what it was at the end of the last full inning. 
 
14. Starting New Innings.  If another LMLL team is waiting to use the field to play a game, a new inning may 
not begin after 1 hour and 45 minutes from the game’s actual start time (not scheduled start time).   For 
example, if another LMLL team is waiting to use the field to play a game, for a 1:30 start, a new inning 
may not start after 3:15; for a 5:45 start a new inning may not begin after 7:30.  No inning may begin if, 
in the umpire’s opinion, it is unsafe to continue for weather or darkness related reasons.   During the 
playoffs, every effort should be made to complete 6 innings or conclude a game.  If no other game is 
scheduled for the field in which the game is being played, no time limit is in effect (i.e., if field is 
available for continued play, a game may not end due to time).   
 
15. Bat-Around (Continuous Batting Order).  Each team will use a Continuous Batting Order (“CBO”) 
whereby every player present for a team has a batting order slot regardless of whether they are in the field 
or not.  Each player shall play a minimum of 9 defensive outs per game unless a game is shortened due to 
the Mercy Rule, time, weather or darkness.  Managers should play all players as equally as is possible. 
 
16. Game Report Submission.   Within 24 hours from the game’s end, both managers shall submit a game 
report and, if necessary, injury report, to LMLL’s website’ Online Reporting System.  The final score, 
some highlights, and each pitcher’s pitch count shall be reported.  Pitch counts for each pitcher should 
also be emailed to the Commissioner. 
 
 4 
17. Protective Cups.  All male players shall wear a protective cup at every practice and game.  Any player 
playing the position of catcher must wear a protective cup or he may not play the position of catcher.  
 
18. Catchers Masks.   All catcher’s masks must have the dangling throat protector hanging from the mask in 
front of the player’s throat.  This is for every type of mask.  All catchers must wear a mask, “dangling” 
type throat protector and catcher's helmet during infield/outfield practice, pitcher warm-up and games.  
 
19. Chest Protectors.  All catcher’s chest protectors shall be of the type where it extends downward in order 
to protect the catcher’s groin area. 
 
20. Catchers Mitt. All players playing the position of catcher must use a catcher’s mitt.   
 
21. Warm Up Gear.  Any player warming up a pitcher shall be wearing a cup and a catcher’s mask.   
 
22. Hats and Uniforms.  Shirt uniforms must be tucked in and hats will be worn in an appropriate manner 
with the brim pointed forward.  No player shall play without a regulation team jersey or regulation team 
hat. 
 
23. Player Information. All coaches shall maintain on their possession for all games and practices contact 
information for all of his players. 
 
24. Game Balls.  Home teams are responsible for supplying new game balls to the umpire. 
 
25. Back Stop Standing.  No one is to stand directly behind the back stop. 
 
26. Late Arriving Players. Late-arriving players (those arriving after game’s official start (i.e., the first pitch)) 
may be placed anywhere defensively in a game.  Offensively, late-arriving players shall be added to 
current lineup’s end.  For example, if John arrives late in the 2nd inning and is the 11th player on the roster, 
John would bat 11th.  
 
27. Abusive Behavior. Managers are responsible for the behavior of their team’s coaches, players, parents 
and spectators.  Any person being verbally or physically abusive to another player, coach, parent or 
spectator shall be warned by the umpire.  Any warned person who then violates any Code of Conduct 
Rule shall be asked to leave (ejected) the game.  The violator may remain on the premises, but may not 
communicate with any player, coach or the umpire.  If continued violations occur or if the situation 
proves to be a distraction, the umpire may in his/her discretion ask the violator to leave the premises.  
Any player or coach who is removed from a game, shall be suspended for the next scheduled game.  Any 
subsequent violations may result in further suspensions or expulsion from LMLL.  All violations must be 
reported to the Commissioner and the Executive Director, whom shall determine penalties, sanctions or 
punishments.   
 
28. Equal Play Rule.  At a minimum, the following playing time rules must be enforced.  In a typical 6 inning 
game, every child MUST play in the field a minimum of 3 innings per game.  If games are shortened by 
inclement weather, darkness or time constraints, for said games, every child MUST have played in the 
field a minimum of 2 for games of 4 innings.  
 
C. Pitching Rules 
 
1. AAA Division shall follow Little League International’s Regular Season Pitching Rules-Baseball, 
available by App or LLI website. 
 
 5 
2. Pitch Count Reporting.  It shall be the responsibility of all coaches to accurately reports their team’s 
pitchers’ pitch counts on the League Website/App within 24 hours of a game’s completion. 
 
 
 
 
3. Maximum Pitches per Day.  A player must be removed from the position of pitcher when he/she reaches 
the prescribed maximum amount of pitches for his/her age group of pitches per day. A pitcher reaching 
his/her pitch count maximum in the middle of a count to a batter may continue until the batter is out, the 
batter reaches base, or that half inning ends.   
 
a. 9-10 year old - 75 pitches per day 
b. 11-12 year old - 85 pitches per day 
c. 13-16 year old - 95 pitches per day 
 
4. LMLL 40 PITCH RULE. During the regular season, a Pitcher who throws  
more than forty (40) pitches in any game may not pitch at all in his/her team’s next game played.  
This rule will be suspended in the playoffs and can be modified by the Commissioner.  A pitcher, who 
reaches 40 pitches during the middle of a count, may continue until that batter is out, the batter reaches 
base, or the half inning ends.  That pitcher will still be recorded as having thrown 40 pitches and will be 
eligible to pitch in his/her team’s next game. 
 
5. Pitching Threshold. If a pitcher reaches a day(s) of rest threshold while facing a batter, the pitcher may 
continue to pitch until any one of the following conditions occurs:  
a. That batter reaches base;  
b. That batter is retired;  
c. The third out is made to complete the half-inning.  
 
The official pitch count for a pitcher will be recorded as the number of pitches thrown up to and 
including the first pitch to the last batter faced.  This methodology also applies to the “40 Pitch” rule 
described above. 
 
6. Catching and Pitching. Any player, who has played the position of catcher in four (4) or more innings in a 
game, is not eligible to pitch on that calendar day.  A pitcher who delivers 41 or more pitches in a game 
may not play the position of catcher for the remainder of that day.  For example, a player starting as 
catcher for less than three (3) innings and moving to pitcher may throw up to 40 pitches and still move 
back to playing catcher.   
 
7. Rest Day Requirements.  Pitchers must adhere to the following rest requirements: 
a. If a player pitches 1-20 pitches in a day, no (0) calendar day of rest is required; 
b. If a player pitches 21-35 pitches in a day, one (1) calendar day of rest must be observed; 
c. If a player pitches 36-50 pitches in a day, two (2) calendar days of rest must be observed; 
d. If a player pitches 51-65 pitches in a day, three (3) calendar days of rest must be observed; 
e. If a player pitches 66 + pitches in a day, four (4) calendar days of rest must be observed. 
 
Example:  Jim throws 36 pitches in a game on Monday.  He may not pitch in any game on Tuesday nor 
on Wednesday, and is available to pitch on Thursday.  Sally throws 75 pitches on Monday.  She may not 
pitch Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday.  She is available to pitch on Saturday. 
 
8. Suspended Games and Pitching Eligibility.  Pitches delivered in games declared “Suspended Games” 
shall be charged against the player’s eligibility.  In suspended games resumed on another day, the pitchers 
 6 
of record at the time the game was halted may continue to pitch to the extent of their eligibility for that 
day, provided said pitcher has observed the required days of rest.  For example, John pitched 25 pitches 
during the start of the game on Monday, which got suspended due to weather.  The game got rescheduled 
to Thursday that same week without any intervening games, John can pitch up to 75 pitches since he has 
the allotted one (1) calendar day of rest (21–35 pitches) between the 2 days of rest, regardless of the team 
he was/is playing against.   
 
9. These pitching rules shall not be changed or suspended for the break in between the regular season and 
the playoffs. In playoff the 40 pitch rule does not apply and is temporarily suspended. 
 
10. Each team shall maintain pitch counts for both their and the opposing team’s pitcher.  It is recommended 
that 2 people per team keep the pitch count. 
 
11. Following each half inning or the removal of a pitcher from the mound, the coaches shall confirm that 
pitcher’s pitch count and record it in each coaches score book. 
 
12. Any difference in pitch counts shall be mediated between the teams’ Managers. 
 
13. Managers should inquire as to his players’ pitching in other organized baseball settings.  The Manager to 
the best of his/her ability should try to ascertain the pitch count for each player in these other settings.  If 
feasible, a Manager may communicate with a player’s other coach.  If a pitch count cannot be determined, 
innings pitched elsewhere shall be converted to 15 pitched per inning.  These pitch counts should be 
recorded, reported to the Commissioner, and used in the “days rest” rule and “total pitch” rule.   
 
14. Any pitcher who hits 3 batters in an inning or 4 batters in a game shall be removed as a pitcher. 
 
15. Coaches should monitor the number of walks a pitcher has allowed. While there is no set rule that 
requires a pitcher to be removed for walking too many batters, coaches should be mindful of the impact 
too many walks will have on pace of play and the overall game experience. 
 
16. Warm-up pitches are 8 for a new pitcher and 8 between innings. 
 
17. Coaches can visit the mound, however on a 3rd visit within an inning or the 4th visit within a game the 
pitcher has to be removed. 
 
18. Intentional walks are not automatic.  If an intentional walk is to be issued then the pitcher must throw 4 
pitches, these pitches do count in rules numbers 3 and 5 above. 
 
19. No batter may be intentionally walked more than 1 time per game. 
 
20. A pitcher may not wear long sleeves if they are white and/or patterned.  Only solid, non-white long 
sleeves should be worn by a pitcher who chooses to wear long sleeves. 
 
D. Batting and Base Running Rules 
 
1. Pinch Runner.  If the catcher for a team reaches base when there are two outs a pinch runner may be 
inserted for that player.  The pinch runner shall be the player that made the last batted out. 
 
2. “On Deck Batter” Prohibition.  There is no on deck batter (a batter swinging a bat in preparation for a 
plate appearance) in LMLL.  The first violation of this rule shall result in the umpire issuing a warning to 
the offending team.  
 7 
 
3. Bats. All bats must be approved for LMLL play and have a USA stamp. 
 
4. Batting Helmets.  Batting helmets must be worn by all batters, base runners and player base coaches at all 
times.  It is at the umpire’s discretion to issue a warning for a first offense. 
 
 
5. Eight or Fewer Players  
a. Automatic outs for 8 players or less should only be assessed during playoffs, no automatic 
outs shall be recorded for regular season games. 
b. Teams starting games with 8 players shall be assessed an automatic out when the 9th batting 
position is due up. 
c. If a player exits the game for any reason (including injury) leaving his team with only 8 players, an 
out shall be assessed when it is that player’s “at bat”. 
d. Team’s facing a team with 8 players may not intentionally walk a batter to get to the 9 th batting 
order position in order to get the automatic out.  
e. Games should not be played with less than 8 players 
 
6. Infield Fly Rule.  The “infield fly rule” is in play when applicable and may be called by the umpire.  The 
rule states that with runners on 1st and 2nd or runners on 1st, 2nd and 3rd with less than 2 outs, if a ball is 
hit in the air that should result in an out with an ordinary effort by any “infield” player then the batter is 
out and runners may advance at their own risk.  For the purpose of this rule, the catcher, pitcher and any 
outfielder situated in the infield will be considered infielders.  A batted ball hit to shallow outfield but 
deemed ordinary or routine shall also be included in the “infield fly rule”.   
 
7. “Head First Slides”.  A runner is out if they slide headfirst while advancing to the next base. However, a 
headfirst slide is permitted when returning to a base the runner previously occupied.  
 
8. No “Must Slide Rule”.  Although there is no “must slide rule”, it is the base runner’s responsibility to 
avoid contact with any defensive player and players should be encouraged to slide when a play will be 
close.  Any runner is out who does not slide or attempt to get around a fielder who has the ball and is 
waiting to make the tag.   
 
9. Home Plate Blocking.  “Obstruction” is the act of any defensive player who, while not in possession of 
the ball, impedes the progress of any runner and shall be called on any defensive player who blocks off a 
base, base line or home plate from a base runner while not in possession of the ball.  A fake tag is 
considered obstruction.   
 
10. Tag Avoidance.  Any runner is out when running beyond three (3) feet from his baseline to avoid being 
tagged, unless seeking to avoid interference with a fielder fielding a batted ball. A runner’s baseline is 
established when the tag attempt occurs and is a straight line from the runner to the base which he/she is 
attempting to reach.   
 
11. Unimpeded Base Path.  A defensive player has the right of way when attempting to field a ball.  In all 
other cases a runner has a right to a free, unimpeded path to the base.  When a collision occurs between 
the runner and fielder, the umpire will determine whether interference has occurred by the fielder, the 
base runner or neither.  
 
a. If the umpire declares the batter, batter-runner or a runner out for interference (i.e., an act by the 
team at bat which interferes with, obstructs, impedes, hinder or confuses any fielder attempting to 
 8 
make a play), all other runners shall return to the last base that was, in the empire’s judgment, 
legally touched at the time of the interference, unless otherwise provided by these rules.  
 
12. Bat Throwing.  Throwing a bat by a player will result in a warning from the umpire for a 1st offense and 
an automatic out for the 2nd and each subsequent offense by that player.  If possible, the umpire should 
declare the out immediately. 
 
13. Walks.  A batter cannot advance to second base on a walk. 
 
14. Home plate is in fair territory. 
 
15. “Hit Player” Rule  
a. A pitch that hits the dirt and then a batter shall result in the batter being awarded 1st base as a hit 
batman.   
b. If a ball is hit in fair territory and hits the batter when he/she is out of the batter’s box then the 
batter is out. 
 
16. Lead Off & Stealing.   
a. Runners may not take a lead off of any base and may only leave the base after the ball is either hit 
or has reached the batter. 
b. Base runners can steal by straight steal, passed ball, or wild pitch. 
c. ‘Double’ steals are allowed (runners 1st and 2nd, both may advance on the same batter). 
d. A base runner can only steal one base per batter.  (Ex., If Jon is on 1st and steals 2nd while Steve 
is at the plate, Jon may not steal 3rd base during the rest of Steve’s at bat.) 
e. A base runner cannot advance on an errant throw by the catcher during a stealing attempt. (Ex. 
Steve is at bat.  Jamie is on 1st and attempts to steal 2nd.  The catcher overthrows the ball into 
centerfield.  Since a play was made on the attempted steal, Jamie cannot advance to 3rd.) 
f. A base runner can advance one base on an errant throw by the pitcher or catcher attempting to 
pick off the base runner. 
g. Each team is allowed one steal of home per inning. 
h. A base runner may only attempt to steal once the ball crosses the plate.  If the umpire determines 
that the runner left “early” or before the ball crossed plate, runner will be sent back to base 
previously occupied and given a warning.  2nd offense by the same runner will result in an out.   
i. Delayed steals are NOT allowed. 
j. In the event the pitcher or catcher engages the field between pitches (for example, if an attempt is 
made to pickoff a runner), the ball will be considered live and any runner could then initiate a 
steal assuming said runner has not already stolen during the current at bat. Even in the event of an 
overthrow, runners would never be allowed to advance more than a single base in this scenario. 
i. As an exception, and consistent with Rule D13 above, this would not apply on a walk. If 
a runner rounds first after a walk, their only option is to return to first base even if an 
attempt is made on the runner and even in the event of an overthrow. 
 
17. Overthrows 
a. One base shall be rewarded to a runner if a ball is overthrown and determined to be out of play by 
the umpire. 
b. Runners may advance one base only on an overthrow unless a subsequent play is made on the 
runner at the next base. (Ex. If Jon hits the ball and is running to 1st and the ball is overthrown 
and stays in play, Jon may advance toward 2nd base. If the defense attempts to make a play on Jon 
as he advances to 2nd and there is an overthrow at 2nd, Jon may then attempt to advance to 3rd, 
etc…).  
 9 
c. Routine return throws from the catcher to the pitcher will be considered dead balls, regardless of 
whether the ball is overthrown or missed by the pitcher, unless a base steal is attempted prior to 
the return throw by the catcher. 
 
18. Dropped Third Strike.  A dropped third strike, either called or swung at, is an out.  The Catcher need not 
make a play on the batter or to first to effectuate the out.  A base runner may lead and/or steal on a 
dropped third strike as long as they are complying with all other stealing rules. 
 
19. Bunting.  Bunting is allowed. However, no slap or slug bunting is permitted. A batter may not take a full 
swing AFTER they have squared to bunt, whether it is a fake bunt or otherwise. 
 
E. Protests 
 
1. Protests can be filed when there is an obvious violation of any rule that may affect a game’s outcome. 
 
2. Every effort should be made on the part of the opposing managers and umpire to avoid a protest and 
mediate any difference of opinion. 
 
3. A call made by an umpire that is subjective may not be protested. 
 
4. To file a protest, a manager must immediately inform the opposing manager and umpire of the intent to 
protest the game at the time of the infraction. 
 
5. The umpire shall note the intent to protest the game. 
 
6. The manager filing the protest must communicate via email to the Commissioner the reason for the 
protest, the violation that occurred, the opposing manager and umpire’s names and the game situation at 
the time of the protest including the score at the time. 
 
7. The Commissioner will hear the protest, speak to who he deems necessary, and make a decision which 
will be final. 
 
8. Protests cannot be filed after the fact or after the game has concluded unless a violation comes to light 
after the fact, i.e., an ineligible player was used. 
 
 
F. Taxi Squad 
 
1. See taxi squad document.       
 
 
G. Playoffs 
 
1. Playoffs will be scheduled by Commissioner and all above rules (barring the 40 Pitch Rule) will apply in 
playoffs. 
 